Update mobile release process documentation (#1225)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/internal/mobile-build-process/_index.md

title: Mobile Build Process
heading: "The Mattermost Mobile Build Process"
description: "Learn what there is to know about the mobile build process for Mattermost's applications."
date: 2023-03-09T09:05:00-05:00
weight: 31
---

## 1. Prerequisites

In order to run all the Fastlane scripts, you will need an Apple machine. The steps can be run manually, but the scripts make things much more easy.

You must have ruby 2.7. You can use [`rbenv`](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv) to manage your ruby version.

The Fastlane scripts rely heavily on environment variables. In order to manage them, we recommend defining them in a `.env` file in the fastlane folder (`PROJECT_DIR/fastlane/.env`).

The first time you run this, you will need to install fastlane. On the fastlane folder (`PROJECT_DIR/fastlane/`) run `bundle install`.

## 2. Build and version bump
To bump the build number, we recommend using the following set of environment variables:
```
export INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER=true
export BUILD_NUMBER=X
export COMMIT_CHANGES_TO_GIT=true
export BRANCH_TO_BUILD=main
export GIT_LOCAL_BRANCH=bump-build
```

> Where X is the build number. The build number **MUST** always be greater than the last build number used. Uploading two builds with the same build number to the stores will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where X is the build number. The build number **MUST** always be greater than the last build number used for the same bundle/package id. Uploading two builds with the same build number to the stores will fail.
```

title: Mobile Build Process
heading: "The Mattermost Mobile Build Process"
description: "Learn what there is to know about the mobile build process for Mattermost's applications."
date: 2023-03-09T09:05:00-05:00
weight: 31
---

> # 1. Pre-requisites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 1. Prerequisites
```

In order to run all the Fastlane scripts, you will need an Apple machine. The steps can be run manually, but the scripts make things much more easy.

> You must have ruby 2.7. You can use [`rbenv`](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv) to manage your ruby version.

Reviewer: We will be bumping this to ruby 3.2 as 2.7 reaches eol in three weeks and 2 days

The Fastlane scripts rely heavily on environment variables. In order to manage them, we recommend defining them in a `.env` file in the fastlane folder (`PROJECT_DIR/fastlane/.env`).

The first time you run this, you will need to install fastlane. On the fastlane folder (`PROJECT_DIR/fastlane/`) run `bundle install`.

> # 2. Build and version bump

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 2. Build and version bump
```

> For build bump, we recommend to use the following set of environment variables:

Author: I guess this would be more `To bump THE build number`, right?

```
export INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER=true
export BUILD_NUMBER=X
export COMMIT_CHANGES_TO_GIT=true
export BRANCH_TO_BUILD=main
export GIT_LOCAL_BRANCH=bump-build
```
Where X is the build number. The build number **MUST** be always greater than the last build number used. If you try to upload two builds with the same build number to the stores, it will fail.

For version bump, also add the following environment variable:
```
VERSION_NUMBER=X.Y.Z
```
Where X.Y.Z is the version number.

With the setup done, you can run the following commands, depending on what you want to bump:
- `bundle exec fastlane set_app_build_number` to bump only the build number
- `bundle exec fastlane set_app_verion` to bump only the version number
- `bundle exec fastlane set_app_version_build` to bump both build and version number

The command should create the branch, and commit the changes. Once that is done, push the branch and create a PR.

> # 3. Create a build and publish

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 3. Create a build and publish
```

In order to trigger the CI, you must create a new branch based on the commit you want to compile (usually the head of the main branch or the head of the release branch). The branch name has to follow one of the following patterns

- `build-X` where x is the build number for beta apps.
- `build-release-x` where x is the build number for official releases.

When you create the branch, you will see that the CI system will trigger, and start building the apps. When the process finishes, the apps get posted in the ["Release: Mobile Apps"](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/release-mobile-apps) channel.

If the build fails only for one platform, you shouldn't run the build for both platforms (it will have the same build number, and will fail to upload to the one that was successful before). In order to release only for one platform, use the following branch names:
- `build-android-beta-X` where x is the build number for android beta apps.
- `build-android-release-X` where x is the build number for official android releases.
- `build-ios-beta-X` where x is the build number for ios beta apps.
- `build-ios-release-X` where x is the build number for ios official releases.

> # 4. Common problems

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 4. Common problems and workarounds
```

- Fastlane forces me to update it, and now the version won't bump because the branch is not clean.

You can set the COMMIT_CHANGES_TO_GIT environment variable to false. That will remove the clean check, but you will need to commit the changes yourself.

# 5. Environment variables

> - VERSION_NUMBER: The version number to set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `VERSION_NUMBER`: The version number to set.
```

> - BUILD_NUMBER: (defaults to the build number defined on iOS + 1) The build number to set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `BUILD_NUMBER`: The build number to set. Defaults to the build number defined on iOS + 1.
```

> - INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER: (`true` or `false`) whether it should increase the build number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER`: Determines whether it should increase the build number. Can be `true` or `false`. 
```

> - COMMIT_CHANGES_TO_GIT: (`true` or `false`) whether it should commit the changes to git. Also checks for the clean status of the git repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `COMMIT_CHANGES_TO_GIT`: Determines whether it should commit the changes to git, and checks for the clean status of the git repository. Can be `true` or `false`. 
```

> - BRANCH_TO_BUILD: Ensures we are putting the changes on top of the specified branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `BRANCH_TO_BUILD`: Ensures we are putting the changes on top of the specified branch.
```

> - GIT_LOCAL_BRANCH: Local branch where to commit the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `GIT_LOCAL_BRANCH`: Local branch where changes are committed.
```

> - RESET_GIT_BRANCH:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `RESET_GIT_BRANCH`:
```

Reviewer 2: This env variable is missing a description

> - MAIN_APP_IDENTIFIER: (defaults to `com.mattermost.rnbeta`) If your app identifier is different, you can set it with this environment variable.

Reviewer: Not needed for this process. 

You could aldo add links to https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/more-info/mobile/build-your-own/ios/#4-configure-environment-variables and https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/more-info/mobile/build-your-own/android/#5-configure-environment-variables to see all the supported environment variables per platform

> - INCREMENT_VERSION_NUMBER_MESSAGE: (defaults to `Bump app version number to`) Commit message when incrementing the version number. Will be appended the version number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `INCREMENT_VERSION_NUMBER_MESSAGE`: The commit message when incrementing the version number. Will be appended to the version number. Defaults to `Bump app version number to`.
```

> - INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER_MESSAGE: (defaults to `Bump app build number to`) Commit message when incrementing the build number. Will be appended the build number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `INCREMENT_BUILD_NUMBER_MESSAGE`: The commit message when incrementing the build number. Will be appended to the build number. Defaults to `Bump app build number to`. 
```
